So, I'm about 2 hours outside of London
in an area that's known as Motorsport
Valley. And that's because seven of the
Formula 1 teams have major operations
here to the tune of 40,000 people
working in about an hour and a half's
radius of right here. It's a fascinating
legacy that goes back to before World
War II, where a bunch of engineers came
to this area to build airplanes, and now
they're in the business of building fast
cars. With them, the F1 teams have
brought a billion-dollar industry of
engineering and manufacturing companies,
making some of the most advanced
technology used in racing. For many
years, one of these technologies,
simulated driving, has shown the
potential to change the sport of F1.
From how fast the cars can drive to how
expensive they are to make to which
drivers shoot to the head of the pack.
But sim driving has always been second
best to real life time on the track. But
for how long? Is the technology finally
good enough to replicate the real thing?
and what will that mean for the future
of the sport?
This is Power Players.
I've landed at the headquarters of
Williams Racing to meet with James Val,
who's been the team principal for the
last 2 years, inheriting a team in need
of a reboot and surrounded by its
fiercest competitors in the heart of
Oxfordshire. It's funny as I arrived
here and sort of took in this whole
notion of motorsport valley. I mean, it
strikes me this is where innovation is
happening. How did that come about? I
mean, you've watched this grow over the
course of your career.
>> Yeah, it's it's a good question, isn't
it? You had really some of the best
metal workers in the world, as you
imagine, back after World War II here,
based around this part of Oxford near
Comventry, and Formula 1 cars back there
were metal
>> in this factory couple hundred people
not too long ago, upwards of a thousand
now. Is that right?
>> Yeah, that's right. You may look at it
and go, that's a lot of people for two
racing cars going around in circles. And
it is, but it's also an indication as
just to how far we're pushing the
boundaries of technology and innovation
and the detail really we're going into.
I think compared to even just 5 years
ago, we're in a far higher level of
granularity and detail than we ever have
been before.
>> You come over from Mercedes, you become
the team principal, you inherit, you
walk into a situation that you have said
necessitated just breaking everything.
Tell me about what you discovered when
you got here. Mercedes is incredible
organization with some really great
senior leaders that understand what
excellence looks like and it led on to
multiple world championships as a result
but every facility you could ever want
or desire was there. There was no
concerns about buying it. It was just
how long let's get it in job done.
Williams had a lack of investment for
around about 20 years or so which in our
world is a long time and again going
correlates our last championship since
1997 and that showed when I joined here.
Technology was central to Val's plans
for William's revival, but in order to
get there, he had to rip up a playbook
that had been gathering dust for a
while.
>> It was guided by individuals that had an
understanding of how to do various car
structures, components, damping systems.
You're kind of trying to guide yourself
in the night with a flashlight with a
faulty battery. What you really need is
simulation and structure that provides
you clear north stars. We're going that
way. You've been quoted as saying, you
know, you're in the business of fighting
giants. You know, you're looking up the
table that you were much further down
the table when you got here. You moved
up. Your aspirations are are much
bigger. How does, you know, sort of
being, as you've described, a challenger
brand enabled you to maybe use
technology in a different way?
>> It's really quite daunting going, we're
going to completely change. We're going
to destroy that, throw it away, we're
going to start again. I had nothing to
lose in that regard. In fact, the
biggest element was getting people's
heads the culture change around it's
okay. We're going to fall flat on our
face. We've reached the point where the
the data is outweighing the number of
eyeballs we can put on at any minute.
And that's where technology comes in.
>> As you go about doing that, how do you
get the people comfortable with the
technology in order that they can
embrace it? How do you because it's
changing thinking. car data in 2000 was
probably 60 channels, maybe 100
channels, went to tens of thousands, if
not hundreds of thousands today. And
once you start walking people through
the pathway, you can sort of see the
eventuality to it. And we're definitely
not using all of it. But when you learn
how to just understand the correct
pathways, you can become much much
better. And that's that's the journey
we're on. All of this is happening with
a backdrop of a business that has
changed pretty dramatically over the
past few years. Most notably with the
introduction of a cost cap.
>> Cost cap. One of the best regulations we
ever put in. Full stop.
>> The cost cap limits each team spending
to $135 million a year. But that figure
will rise to $215 million in 2026. The
implementation of the cost cap not only
leveled the playing field, it made
simulation a sudden top priority for
every team on the circuit as the only
cost-effective means of testing,
innovating, and improving.
>> You're assessing where you are. You were
using the data more to all veil. You're
not just flat out on a treadmill trying
to move forward. You're strategic in
your thought. So, you have to think
differently. And the cost cap, what it
enables us to do is is it drives
efficiency naturally and makes us into a
business. And by the way, that's not a
bad thing. We're still a sport. We're
still independent. We're still Williams,
but we're a business at the same time.
So, every dollar has to be absolutely
squeezed for the maximum that can come
out of it.
>> And so, when it comes to some of the
ways that you find efficiency, clearly
simulators are a big piece of that. The
technology is eyepopping. The the way it
has improved, how it is factored into
your processes,
how it changes the interaction with your
drivers. So, you've hit the nail on the
head. A key part of driving this forward
is simulation.
>> Simulation generally falls into one of
two categories. The first is where the
driver physically sits inside and drives
a physical model on a virtual circuit.
It's a very powerful model if you can
design it the right way. But the problem
is it's real time, so you can only run
so many labs. The second type is called
offline simulation. It's a virtual model
with a simulated driver, meaning it can
operate up to 10,000 times faster. get
thousands and thousands of iterations in
just a few minutes and explore the many
nuances of speed and maneuverability.
But modeling has to be done very
carefully because if the driver is made
to be too good, the car could end up
undrivable in real life. F1 is bracing
for new regulations in 2026 that will
reshape how every car in the circuit
will be built and engineered with hybrid
technology. So, as much trial and error
as possible is paramount.
If you imagine this transition to 2026,
we ran on track just this week, the 2026
tires, but that's on a completely
different car to what we're going to
have next year. The power unit sits on a
bench in Mercedes HPP. We haven't really
seen that. The gearbox is with Mercedes
chassis side. They're not components
that are come together yet. So, we're
sort of making our way in a theoretical
world to make sure we're pathing
ourselves correctly. What I like about
simulation more than anything else is it
allows you to really think in a
completely different way or potentially
find a completely different avenue of
thought that you had perhaps not even
really explored previously or thought
about. Here at Williams, we're behind.
There's no doubt about it. I've been
public about it. We we started our
journey much later than than others, but
our direction of travel is strong.
>> Is it fair to say you of late have been
more aggressive in investing in
simulation? I would say probably from
the day I got through the door. So the
investment started pretty much day two.
I just needed a little bit of time to
understand where we were.
>> You needed one day to understand and
then the second day you were ready
>> pretty much. But it it doesn't take
long.
>> Simulation has sort of taken on this new
sort of cultural import. It has changed
the way that drivers grow up into this
sport. The acceleration of the
technology and efficiency of building
lowerc cost simulators means the access
is growing at an exponential rate as
well, which also feeds the needs of F1
from the bottom up. The next generation
of drivers have grown up being in sims
their entire lives, including Lando
Norris, one of F1's current top drivers.
And next up is another swath of drivers
who have even earlier access to even
better sim technology. drivers like Abby
Pulling, the young breakout star of F1
Academy.
Aby's at the forefront of what may be
the next leap for drivers representing
the future of the sport. And today,
she's training for an upcoming race at
Base Performance, a simulator company
with a primary focus on driver
development.
>> I've been racing since I was 8 years
old. There's a lot of things that I love
about racing. The adrenaline that you
get, the highs and lows, you've got to
enjoy both of it. the ladder in
motorsport and specifically the
single-seater ladder. You start in
carting. I started at eight and then
moving forward going to cars. So when
you're around 14, 15, you can start
getting a race license. And that's where
you start testing in single seaters and
kind of homing your craft of what you've
learned in in carting. And it's a whole
new ball game. It's very tough, way more
physical, um way more demanding. With
that also comes a cost increase. From
carting, you can spend from 30 grand a
year upwards to 200, 250 grand. And then
going through to single seaters, it can
be 500 grand to a million if you're
doing multiple championships to then F3,
which is 1.5 million to 2 million. And
then that's where you get to FIF2, 2
million to 3 million. If you do good
enough in that, you'll get the
opportunity to be promoted to Formula 1,
which sometimes isn't always where you
start getting paid, but most likely
you'll start earning a salary at that
point. For me, costs have always been a
really big issue. It's been the thing
that's held me back the most. There's
drivers that you come up against, male
or female. There's some drivers that
struggle, some drivers that don't. It's
not really specific to gender. You get
drivers that can put millions into it
and do tons of testing. With motorsport,
the the problem is it's becoming more
and more expensive to do the testing.
And that means that drivers are having
to go out there and try and perform at
their max and try and impress people
when they've done very, very little
testing against someone that's can, you
know, drive the track with their eyes
closed. Not literally. base performance
is plugged into a growing ecosystem
centered around motorsport valley that
they hope will be able to better support
the next generation of drivers carving a
path for themselves to climb the ranks.
This is something managing director
James Guest highlighted to distinguish
itself in the field of simulation. So
base performance were very much focused
on driver development, driver training,
not on the car development and
engineering side of the business. To get
track familiarization, car
familiarization is hugely expensive. You
have to have a team of people. You've
got to get the car there. You've got to
rent the track. You've got fuel, tires.
So, a test day can cost anywhere from 7
to£20,000
depending on the the formula you're in.
F1's even higher than that. The niche
market we're in is providing simulators
for the home market, but we also provide
simulators for other driver training
centers and some race teams that want to
focus on driver training rather than
just the engineering tools. Engineering
tools can be used, but they often use
more sophisticated hardware and
software, which brings the costs up
massively. Our niche is really about
training the driver to improve their
skill sets and the way that they drive
and how they perform and to familiarize
themselves with new circuits.
>> I ran out of funding in 2021 and joined
an all female series after that. Uh, and
and it was heartbreaking. You know, I've
been doing it since I was 8 years old. I
think I was 18 at the time, so that's
majority of my life. But when one door
closes, another one opens. And I got to
continue racing through these all female
series. And they do get a lot of
criticism. And at first I probably was a
bit tentative of it as I grew up my
whole life racing against the boys and
and I was one of the few females that
were around. But I've seen the value in
it and I'm living breathing proof that
it's working. Championships like F1
Academy is I think really vital. F1
Academy is a series. It's all female. I
think there's now 18 on the grid. It's
the reason that I'm still racing. It's
giving so many opportunities now to to
young females, but also it's got so much
visibility that it's actually showing
younger girls coming through the ranks
of actually I can be a racing driver.
And it is becoming the norm, but
everyone's dream I think is to make it
to 41 or majority of drivers. So, it
takes a lot of hard work and you've also
got to accept the fact that you can put
in all this hard work and in the end you
don't reach that goal. But I don't think
any of us ever stop. We all keep
continuing. You've got to have that
belief at the end of the day in
yourself.
>> In today's day and age, that belief can
be reinforced through the real-time
feedback of advanced simulation in ways
more readily available than ever before.
Further, the range in sim capabilities
varies wildly as the levels of purpose
and sophistication begin to ascend to
meet the needs of the highest levels of
the sport.
>> I'll go through the levels with rough
costings. Uh, probably the cheapest sim
you could get is a seat, a set of
pedals, and a computer. You're probably
at $5,000. And then they start stepping
up. You can step up to a 10,000, then a
16,000 or 20,000. At 20,000, you're not
bad. Probably still don't have motion,
just to be really clear. But your
steering feels very good. Where you are
as a representation of the car is very
good. Then you start running out of road
there pretty quickly and you're into a
million. And then you start running out
of roads. There's some steps and then
you're into about 12 to 16 million.
Welcome to Formula 1 Teams.
>> Enter companies like Dynisma, which is
all in on the car development and
serving the innovation needs of the F1
teams directly at the high end of the
spectrum.
>> So, Isaac, any feedback about the car?
>> I think high speed is a little over
steering.
>> Low speed feels good and the traction is
a little low.
>> Okay, sounds like we could change your
arrow balance and maybe your tire grip.
Isaac Phelps is a young driver who has
come in for a test run on a simulator
developed by Dynisma company led by its
founder and CTO Ash Warren. While
working on simulation technology for
some of the top F1 teams, Ash recognized
a gap in the market and a rapidly
emerging need.
>> I was lucky enough to work at two really
fantastic F1 teams. I spent 7 and 1/2
years working at McLaren Racing where I
did a a huge range of roles from the
wind tunnel to aerodynamic modeling to
offline computer simulation. I worked at
Ferrari for three and a half years
exclusively really in the in the driving
simulator. While working at both McLaren
and Ferrari, I had extensive experience
and exposure to the the state-of-the-art
as it was then in relation to driving
simulation technologies. But what I
observed was that there were significant
limitations and in particular that there
was no commercial route to obtaining the
sort of technology and performance that
Formula 1 teams needed. So I founded
Daisma really with a view to opening up
the market for highlevel driving
simulator technologies that were
sufficient for uh F1 teams but also
really to be able to take that
technology to a much wider market.
>> However, the cost of alleviating those
precious few milliseconds is not for the
faint of heart. We have a range of of
different systems typically for a
professional motorsport team including
the motion system and the visuals
anywhere from£3 million to 10 million.
>> But F1 teams don't bat an eyelash when
they compare it to the alternative.
>> In years gone by it was possible in F1
that there was the teams were able to go
and do inseason testing and pre-season
testing. There was extensive ontrack
testing but this was phenomenally
expensive. All of that has moved online
and it has moved into the the simulation
environment.
>> You can change the point4 to maybe like
35.
Perfect. And just send that and then we
can get him started again.
>> The return on investment for racing
teams investing in simulators is
massive. In the past, good simulators
with the preserve of a couple of teams
who invested heavily in that. But what
Denisma has done to transform the market
is to bring along a commercial solution
that's actually better than what all the
other teams are able to deliver
themselves. At the heart of that again
is our motion generator technology. And
this provides the driver with the
physical movements and the feedback that
they would get from the real car. It's
providing them with information about
what is going on with the car physics so
that they can feel when the rear tires
start to slide or under rotate or
perhaps they get some under steer as
they're turning into a corner. So the
teams themselves, they know their cars
intimately. They know exactly how the
aerodynamics perform, how the powertrain
performs and the suspension for example.
So they've all encapsulated this in a
piece of software called a vehicle
model. This is integrated directly with
our motion platform so that when in the
physics say there's a a moment of over
steer within 5 milliseconds, we're able
to reproduce that and measure that we've
reproduced that on our motion platform.
So they get this instantaneous feedback.
In addition to the motion, there's of
course the steering wheel. So this is
another really key input that the driver
is using to feel what the car is doing
and to control it, of course. Then of
course there's the graphics as you can
see behind me here. We've got a
projector setup, but there are many
other configurations as well, such as
LED walls. And finally, there's also the
sound. We're able to excite the whole
platform as though an engine is sat
right behind the driver. So our motion
generator is creating engine vibrations
and putting them through the chassis. So
as well as like going over bumps or
reacting to over steer or turning into a
corner, the driver can also feel the
engine vibrations and this gives them a
whole load of extra information that
they otherwise wouldn't have.
>> But what is it that differentiates
Dynisma from its many competitors and
has earned the trust of the F1 teams
aiming to maximize its capabilities?
>> Latency in particular. And what latency
is in the context of a motion system
like ours is that any delay that there
is from when the vehicle physics are
calculated to when we're able to replay
those movements through the motion
system. In a Dennisma simulator, this is
typically 3 to 5 milliseconds, which is
basically imperceptible. In contrast,
previous motion simulators could be 20,
even 50 milliseconds. And when you do
have those sorts of delays, it entirely
destroys their illusion and the
simulation that the driver is engaged in
controlling that car because they simply
can't respond to what the car is doing.
>> I think we're close to break time for
you just to let you know he doesn't
care. Little break, Isaac.
>> Uh yeah,
>> cool. Yeah, we'll bring you to a stop
and pop you down.
Sims have become ubiquitous in the sport
and are a key to the future of Formula
1. They're narrowing the competitive
margins for both the drivers and the
teams, ushering in a new era of
competition and proprietary
customization. How much in your in your
investments and in your colleagues at
other teams investments? How much of
your own IP goes into that? How much are
they customized?
>> Watch this space. I'll let you know how
it goes. But now you're into what I
would call team IP. the physics models
that run behind it, the time models that
run behind it, all of that is very much
team IP, not shared between teams and is
the differentiator.
>> There's some secret sauce here,
>> correct?
>> From team to team because I mean even in
reporting this candidly, it's one of the
areas where teams are very protective of
their IP and presumably rightly so.
>> Exactly that and for exactly the reasons
I said. Yes, it's very protected, very
confidential in how we operate, how we
work
>> because as I said, you get it right. You
can be firing on all cylinders. If it's
not, you're in trouble.
>> But you can't go to a supplier and get
this information. You have to generate
it internally.
>> It's rapidly evolving terrain and one
that requires keeping an eye even
further down the road to see the next,
next, and the next turn ahead. Sometimes
multiple years out.
>> Effectively with the 27 car, there there
was a meeting that takes place in in
just a few weeks time. And that's
already fleshing out some pretty serious
elements of what we need. Now, we're
going to learn a lot when we hit the
track running in January and February,
but that's how far in advance you need
to be thinking of all these aspects to
be on time.
>> Yeah.
>> And again, when you start your thought
process conceptually is going 2 years
ahead of you, if not 3 years ahead of
you, that needs simulation to be able to
deal with it. The deal I signed when I
came here is we're here to win multiple
championships. We're not going to get
there by just gently iterating there. We
have to physically do things in a very
different way to how we've done it
before and perhaps even how the grid is
doing it today. That means you're
forward investing. Everything is forward
investing. You do anything short-term,
you're not going to be able to
accomplish those goals of winning
championships because you're up against
nine other teams that are working
probably at a more efficient rate than
you are in that space. There is a
potential and it feels like you you are
saying this that you do have to
sacrifice some of the performance in 25
as you look ahead to 26. How do you
manage that with drivers?
>> Undoubtedly, I will look you in the eyes
and say we have sacrificed tremendous
amounts of performance this year.
Tremendous amounts. We've had a good
performance.
>> Mhm.
>> But uh to give a concept to that, I
think we allowed a total of 2 weeks to
refine a package that turned on the car.
That was it. 2 weeks. I want to hear
about it again after that. 26. Carlos
and Alex were aware that they have a
unique what I feel to be a unique
opportunity as I do to leave your mark
on the sport. But to get there, we're
not going to do it by slowly refining
this car. We're going to do it by
reinventing everything. We have a clean
sheet of paper next year. Not nothing
carries over. There's no bolt. There's
no not a seat belt, not a steering
wheel. Nothing carries over next year.
Williams is bigger than me. It's bigger
than Carlos. It's bigger than Alex.
We're all a part of something that will
be a legacy going forward that we'll
feel we're a part of, but it's bigger
than any three of us.
>> Just how big and how fast is anybody's
guess.
Heat.
Hey, Heat.